# Predicting-patient-outcome-after-TBI-using-regularized-regression

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) is commonly cited as a cause of death and disability worldwide. The early prediction of the outcome of TBI based on hospital admission characteristics can play a critical role in supporting clinical decision making. The primary aim of this study was to develop a validated prognostic model to predict unfavourable outcome after TBI at 6 months using information that is readily available upon admission to hospital. A total of 1,111 patients with complete data from a trial in the US and a second international trial were included in the derivation (n= 545) and external validation (n=566) datasets, respectively. A total of 16 predictor variables available at hospital admission were included in the prediction models. Sample size analysis were carried out to determine the minimum sample size required for the development of the multivariate prediction model. We compared the predictive performance of several statistical and machine learning algorithms on the external test set to select a final model. More specifically we ran a standard regression and regularized logistic regressions (LASSO models) with (i) minimum lambda and (ii) minimum lambda + 1SE tuning parameters optimized via repeated cross validation. Sample size calculations indicated that the available sample size and event per candidate ratio were not sufficient for a well-performing model and that there may be some overfitting. Overall, the three models performed rather similarly on measures of accuracy, sensitivity and specificty. However, the regularized models showed improved discrimination with an AuC of 0.81 (95% CI: 0.77-0.84) as compared to the standard logistic regression (AuC: 0.79; 95% CI: 0.76 - 0.84). Moreover, the minimum lambda model showed slightly better performance on the external test set as compared to the minimum lambda + 1SE model on, such as sensitivity (0.52 and 0.47, respectively). As such, we recommend the use of the LASSO model tuned for the minimum lambda to address problems in overfitting and to limit the number of predictors used in the model, thereby making it more practical for clinical use. The study at hand does suffer from a few drawbacks. For example, we did not explore patterns of missingness in the data in an effort to impute missing values and instead carried out complete case analyses. This is a drawback insofar as missingness mechanisms that may influence prediction accuracy were not explored. Moreover, while performance was assessed by means of various metrics, calibration, which is considered to be a key metric in model validation, was not assessed. The developed prediction model can prove to be a useful tool within hospital settings to support clinical decision making and can be considered in conjuction with other similarly developed models.
